So we already use attribute directives like ngClass and ngStyle,
it's even easier to understand what to do once we've built our own one.
So I want to build a directive which simply highlights an element I hover over, let's say.
Of course I could achieve the same with normal CSS styles but this is just a good demo.
So I will create a new folder and I will name it basic-highlight, like this because in there I create
a new file, basic-highlight and now directive.ts, so before we always had component files,
now this is a new element,
it's not a component, it will be a directive hence the file name.
Now in this file, I'll export a class which I'll name BasicHighlightDirective, again to be descriptive
about what this class is and to make it a directive,
just like with a component where we added @component, here we have to add @directive and directive
needs to be imported from @angular/core,
so make sure to add this import and we need to pass an object to this decorator to configure this directive.
Now how do we configure a directive?
The one thing our directive absolutely needs is a selector because remember, we do place directives in
our template to attach them to elements,
so we need to have some way to give Angular that instruction and that is the selector. Here
that should also be a unique selector.
So typically, here you use a camel case notation to give it appHighlight as a selector or here maybe
appBasicHighlight, like this.
Now that would select it by element.
Now I want to have this attribute style, so I'm going to wrap this in square brackets which means this
will now be recognised whenever I add
appBasicHighlight without square brackets to an element. Now to show this, we need to do something which
gives us some visual clue that this is working.
So the basic thing is, the most basic use case is we change let's say the background colour of the element
where we attach this directive. For this we need to get access to the element the directive sits on and
the cool thing is Angular gives us this access. We can inject the element
the directive sits on into this directive and injection is something we'll take a closer look at in
the next course module, in the big next course module which is about services, I can say that much.
It basically is an easy way to get access to some other classes without having them to instantiate
on our own.
We do inject by adding the constructor which every TypeScript class has,
we don't need to write anything in the constructor body for now but here on the list of arguments, we
list a couple of arguments we want to get whenever an instance of this class here is created
and of course Angular is responsible for creating these instances.
So therefore if we tell it to please give us a specific type of argument,
this is what injection is, Angular will try to create this thing we need and give it to us.
Well this thing we need in this case simply is a reference to the element the directive was placed on. So
an element ref and this name is totally up to you but the type is important, the type has to be element ref,
you might recognize this from @ViewChild,
there it also was a reference to some element, here it is too. Now to be able to use this data in our class
here, everywhere in the class, we can use a TypeScript shortcut of adding private in front of it which
will make this both a property of this class, so property element ref and automatically assign this value,
so this instance we're getting to this property.
Now with that, we got access to the element,
now we can use it here in our constructor for example, access the native element and then do something
with it. Though a better place than the constructor is onInit
and just like the component, the directive also has the ngOnInit lifecycle hook.
So here, I can therefore add ngOnInit and in there, we could access element ref,
that's the shortcut which automatically gave me this property, access the native element and there access
the style and maybe the background color and set this equal to green so that we can see something changed.
So what we're doing here is we're getting access to the element the directive was placed on, getting access
to that exact element and then we're overriding the style of this element,
now let's use this directive. To use it,
we have to do two things.
First of all like for a component, we have to inform Angular that we have a new directive.
Just like with components, it doesn't scan all our files, so it doesn't know.
So we have to go to app module and here in declarations, we have to add our BasicHighlightDirective
and also add the import pointing to the basic-highlight folder and there to the BasicHighlightDirective
file.
Now with this, we can use the directive in our app since we informed Angular,
now let's use it in our app.component.html file and here below all our lists,
I will simply add a new paragraph, style me with basic directive, something like that and now to this
paragraph, I can add appBasicHighlight, my own selector.
We don't need to set any value
and importantly, we don't use square brackets because as I already emphasized, the directive name is just
a selector
we set up here and the square brackets here are not part of that name,
it's part of this selector style telling Angular please
select it as an attribute on an element and that's just how we add it here, like an attribute of the paragraph.
Now with that if we save this, we indeed see a green paragraph below our list because our directive is
doing its job here,
it's styling it, so that's our first basic attribute directive.
We can enhance this though.